---
layout: post
title: God still has a shorter Wikipedia article than Kevin Smith (and that's fine)
tags: [wikipedia]
thumbnail: "/assets/msm/nyt.png"
---

In 2007, some users of the SomethingAwful forums [invented "wikigroaning"](https://www.somethingawful.com/news/wikigroaning/), a game poking fun at Wikipedia's questionable editorial priorities. For example: "Wikipedia's article on Optimus Prime is longer than its article on prime numbers". Comparisons like this became a brief viral trend, and the phenomenon was covered in blogs and [mainstream news outlets](TODO).

I was curious to see whether these groans still applied 15 years later.

As it turns out, a lot of them have "flipped". In some cases, this is because the "serious" article has seen significant expansion:

**TODO: examples. Marriage. Citizen Kane. Vulcan.**

There are also quite a number of cases where the "silly" article has been outright deleted (or merged into a small section of a larger article):

**TODO: examples. lots.**

Wikipedia's policies toward the notability of fictional topics was in the middle of a sea change in 2007, and within a few years, a lot of the more niche "fancruft" content had disappeared from the site because it could not be verified in secondary sources.

<!-- approx 65 maintained out of 109 -->

But if you regard this as a positive development, you might be disappointed to hear that, of the 109 circa-2007 groans I looked at, more than half are still in a "groanworthy" state, with the silly article longer than its serious counterpart. Here are just a few examples:

**TODO: examples**

(You can browse the full data [here](https://github.com/colinmorris/wikigroans/blob/master/all_groans.png).)

Before you cancel your recurring Wikimedia Foundation donation in disgust (which I support, but for [different reasons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Guy_Macon/Wikipedia_has_Cancer)), there are a few compelling arguments for why these comparisons, while amusing, are not damning indictments of Wikipedia's policies and community of editors. For example:

- Wikipedia is not a zero-sum game. Expanding the article on Professor X does not make the article on Francis Xavier any worse, and the sets of editors with the ability and interest to edit these two articles are mostly disjoint.
- A having more words than B does not imply that A is higher quality or that it has received more effort from editors.

But there's one particular caveat I want to explore more deeply. I'll use the "Kevin Smith vs. God" wikigroan as an illustrative example. Looking at this graph, it seems like Wikipedia has had more words about Kevin Smith than God since mid-2007:

But what would be an appropriate number of words about God? 10,000 words? 50,000 words? Once an article gets past a certain length, it becomes too hard to navigate and keep organized. That's where one of Wikipedia's key content policies comes in: [**Summary style**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Summary_style).

When an article starts getting too big, chunks of content are split off into separate "subtopic" articles, with a short summary and link left behind in the main article. These subtopic articles can usually be identified at a glance because they'll have italicized "Main page:" links (affectionately referred to by editors as "hatnotes") at the top of the article's sections.

The article on Kevin Smith has 4 subtopic articles, so if we're trying to measure the total amount of Kevin Smith content on the project, we should probably count these as well:

**TODO**

But the article on God has... let's call it 7 subtopic articles?

**TODO**

But wait, some of those subtopics have subtopics! And their subtopics have subtopics! We can continue this for quite a while. For example, God > Conceptions of God > God in Christianity > Trinity > God the Father > God the Father in Western art.

The "God" article is just a jumping off point. Considering the full tree of articles associated with these two topics, it's clear that God's total coverage across articles is far larger. Here's just a portion of it:

**TODO**

